---
layout: post
title: Some food for thought
date: '2011-08-06T02:39:00.000-07:00'
author: Yevgeniy Brikman
tags:
- HowTo
- Reading
- Nutrition
- Health and Fitness
modified_time: '2011-08-06T14:42:22.904-07:00'
thumbnail: http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-wpd1d3cZcdw/Tj0HBNJiWHI/AAAAAAAAJyg/S9bi-DF8S_g/s72-c/stronglifts.jpg
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5422014336627804072.post-1243412681947353075
blogger_orig_url: http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/08/some-food-for-thought.html
---

Although I talk a lot about 
[exercise](http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/07/why-i-dont-want-to-stay-in-shape.html), 
there is another component to being healthy that is worth discussing: diet. 
Don't worry, I'm not going to tell you what to eat or what to avoid. It's not 
that I don't have opinions on this topic - if you know me, you're probably 
used to me butting in with my opinion on all topics - but rather that this 
kind of thing works best if you do the research and make up your own mind. To 
that end, I'm going to use this blog post to list some of the better resources 
I've found regarding food. If you're aware of other good ones, feel free to 
share them in the comments. 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**In Defense of Food** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://michaelpollan.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/idof-3.jpg" 
/>](http://michaelpollan.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/idof-3.jpg)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: center;">[In Defense of 
Food](http://michaelpollan.com/books/in-defense-of-food/) 
*Eat food. Not too much. Mostly plants.* Those three phrases pretty much sum 
up the entire book. But you still might want to read it, as there is a bit of 
a back-story to it. Pollan's main argument is that (a) the absurd spike in 
obesity in the last several decades most likely comes form a change in our 
food supply, (b) food/nutrition science is a remarkably difficult field that 
has not produced any satisfying answers on exactly which changes are causing 
the problems and (c) until they get it figured out, we can rely on some common 
sense and reason to come up with a diet that is likely to be healthy. Pollan's 
discussion of the state of dietary research is eye opening: you *will* 
remember it the next time a "scientists discover that X causes obesity!" study 
pops up on the news. 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**The Omnivore's Dilemma** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://michaelpollan.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/od-3.jpg" 
/>](http://michaelpollan.com/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2010/06/od-3.jpg)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: center;">[The Omnivor'es 
Dilemma](http://michaelpollan.com/books/the-omnivores-dilemma/)Another Michael 
Pollan book that is a great resource for understanding the food supply. In 
this one, he goes through four meals: one that comes from industrial farming 
(fast food), one from an industrial organic farm, one from an 
"alternative/sustainable" organic farm, and one that he grows, forages and 
hunts himself. This book gives you a small glimpse into where your food really 
comes from, something most people don't take into consideration nearly enough. 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**Good Calories, Bad Calories** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://betterme.ca/gcbc%5B1%5D%20%28200x300%29.jpg" 
/>](http://betterme.ca/gcbc%5B1%5D%20%28200x300%29.jpg)<td class="tr-caption" 
style="text-align: center;">[Good Calories, Bad 
Calories](http://www.amazon.com/Good-Calories-Bad-Gary-Taubes/dp/1400040787)There 
are two key reasons to read this book: first, it thoroughly debunks the idea 
that dietary fat is bad for you. Or, to be more accurate, it simply shows how 
little evidence there was for the "eating fat makes you fat" hypothesis in the 
first place. Second, the book does a good job of discussing how not all 
calories are created equal. That is, calorie counting alone is not sufficient 
for maintaining a healthy diet. To be clear, Taubes isn't saying that the laws 
of thermodynamics don't apply, but rather that the way the body processes 
calories from different types of foods has a wide variety of hard to predict 
side effects. While the "carbohydrate hypothesis" Taubes proposes in this book 
is controversial - Taubes himself says a great deal of research is required to 
prove it - the book is important for recognizing that the *type* of food you 
eat is just as important as the *quantity*. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**<span style="font-size: x-large;">The rest** 

I've read a few other books on diet and nutrition, such as [Enter the 
Zone](http://www.amazon.com/Enter-Zone-Barry-Ph-Sears/dp/2570435260), but in 
all honesty, I wouldn't recommend them. The majority of those books just feel 
like marketing gimmicks trying to sell the book and related products. 
Therefore, the rest of the resources I post are blogs, articles, online 
discussions, and studies I've come across that contain useful nuggets of 
information. As with everything else, take them with a grain of salt: their 
value is in providing the context for how to think about diet issues. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Blogs** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/wp-content/themes/revolution-30/images/bodyrecomposition.gif" 
/>](http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/wp-content/themes/revolution-30/images/bodyrecomposition.gif)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/](http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/)Lyle 
McDonald's blog that features tons of well regarded 
[articles](http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/articles) on diet and nutrition. I 
don't agree with everything he writes, but he has some real gems on there, 
such as [The Energy Balance 
Equation](http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/fat-loss/the-energy-balance-equation.html), 
[The Fundamentals of Fat Loss 
Diets](http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/fat-loss/the-fundamentals-of-fat-loss-diets-part-1.html), 
[Carbohydrate and Fat 
Controversies](http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/nutrition/carbohydrate-and-fat-controversies-part-1.html), 
and [Protein 
Controversies](http://www.bodyrecomposition.com/nutrition/protein-controversies.html). 


<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://robbwolf.com/wp/wp-content/themes/robbwolf/images/default-thumb.gif" 
/>](http://robbwolf.com/wp/wp-content/themes/robbwolf/images/default-thumb.gif)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://robbwolf.com/](http://robbwolf.com/)A blog that focuses 
primarily on the [paleo diet](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paleolithic_diet). 
I find paleo a little too hardcore, illogical and unrealistic for my tastes, 
but it works for many and Robb's blog has some good articles. 


<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-wpd1d3cZcdw/Tj0HBNJiWHI/AAAAAAAAJyg/S9bi-DF8S_g/s1600/stronglifts.jpg" 
/>](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-wpd1d3cZcdw/Tj0HBNJiWHI/AAAAAAAAJyg/S9bi-DF8S_g/s1600/stronglifts.jpg)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://stronglifts.com/](http://stronglifts.com/)<div 
class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><div 
class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">Although the 
website is starting to look more and more like marketing material, it's 
actually one of the absolute best (and free) resources on the web for both 
strength training and diet. The [How to Build 
Muscle](http://stronglifts.com/how-to-build-muscle-mass-guide/) and 
[GOMAD](http://stronglifts.com/gomad-milk-squats-gallon-gain-weight/) articles 
are good starting points if you're trying to get bigger. 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://www.crossfitdesmoines.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/cf-journal.jpg" 
/>](http://www.crossfitdesmoines.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/06/cf-journal.jpg)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://journal.crossfit.com/](http://journal.crossfit.com/)The 
Crossfit Journal contains articles and videos about all things Crossfit: 
exercise instruction, competition videos, equipment guides, and, as is 
relevant to this blog post, [nutrition 
articles](http://journal.crossfit.com/nutrition/). It's $25/year for a 
subscription, well worth it if you do Crossfit. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Random articles, studies and discussions** 

A bunch of useful links I've collected over the years. There are many others 
I've lost, so I may update this list over time as I find them. 
1. [Top Ten Fasting Myths 
Debunked](http://www.leangains.com/2010/10/top-ten-fasting-myths-debunked.html): 
do you think that eating many small meals increases your metabolism? Do you 
believe that the body can only absorb 30g of protein per meal? Are you the one 
telling everyone to not eat after 8pm? Yea, should probably read this article. 
1. [The Calorie Delusion: Why Food Labels are 
Wrong](http://www.curiousread.com/2009/07/calorie-delusion-why-food-labels-are.html): 
calorie counting is an imperfect science to begin with. Inaccurate food labels 
make this all the worse. 
1. [The Myth About Muscle and 
Metabolism](http://www.thefactsaboutfitness.com/news/cals.htm): how many 
calories per day do you think a pound of muscle burns? Nope. You're not even 
close. Read the article. 
1. [Crossfit Nutrition Forum](http://board.crossfit.com/forumdisplay.php?f=8): 
Crossfit's [messageboard](http://board.crossfit.com/index.php) is a good place 
to post questions on fitness and nutrition. Check out this epic thread I 
started long ago: [Why bother with the Zone (or any other "name" 
diet)?](http://board.crossfit.com/showthread.php?t=41555) 
<li>["A calorie is a calorie" violates the second law of 
thermodynamics](http://www.nutritionj.com/content/3/1/9) 
</li>1. [The Science of Fat-Loss: Why a Calorie Isn’t Always a 
Calorie](http://www.fourhourworkweek.com/blog/2008/02/25/the-science-of-fat-loss-why-a-calorie-isnt-always-a-calorie/) 