---
layout: post
title: Light reading for heavy lifting
date: '2011-08-09T01:42:00.000-07:00'
author: Yevgeniy Brikman
tags:
- HowTo
- Crossfit
- Health and Fitness
modified_time: '2011-08-09T01:50:47.083-07:00'
thumbnail: http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-wpd1d3cZcdw/Tj0HBNJiWHI/AAAAAAAAJyg/S9bi-DF8S_g/s72-c/stronglifts.jpg
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5422014336627804072.post-5547712824049157911
blogger_orig_url: http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/08/light-reading-for-heavy-lifting.html
---

In my [previous 
post](http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/08/some-food-for-thought.html), I 
listed the best resources I've found for learning about diet and nutrition. In 
this post, I'll do the same for exercise and fitness. 

While doing *any *exercise is better than none at all, not all routines are 
created equal. Chances are that the amount of time you have to dedicate to 
exercise is fairly limited, so it's essential to pick a routine that most 
efficiently meets your 
[goals](http://brikis98.blogspot.com/search/label/Goals). As it turns out, 
optimal training very rarely consists of a light jogging and some situps, so 
if you actually want to see some results, spend a few hours up-front reading 
and learning. 

When it comes to exercise, I'm completely self-taught. Just about everything I 
know - including powerlifting, olympic lifting, gymnastics, kettlebells, 
running, rowing, jump rope, programming, nutrition, strength, endurance, 
power, speed, etc - comes from these resources, so hopefully they will be 
helpful to others. Of course, I'm *still* learning, so if you know of other 
great resources, share them in the comments. 

<span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">**Starting Strength** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" height="320" 
src="http://images.t-nation.com/forum_images/f/d/fd3b1_ORIG-starting_strength.jpg" 
width="247" 
/>](http://images.t-nation.com/forum_images/f/d/fd3b1_ORIG-starting_strength.jpg) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: center;">[Starting 
Strength](http://www.amazon.com/Starting-Strength-2nd-Mark-Rippetoe/dp/0976805421) 
 If you're going to set foot in a gym, this book is required reading. Do not 
pick up a dumbbell, do a situp, or look at a power rack until you read this 
thing cover to cover. Yes, it's worth the $30. Yes, [the complementary 
DVD](http://www.amazon.com/Starting-Strength-Basic-Barbell-Training/dp/B001U9FDP2/ref=pd_bxgy_b_img_c) 
is worth it too. No, I don't make cent off of promoting this book. 

I simply believe that this book, better than any other resource I've ever 
seen, manages to cover an enormous range of the most important topics in 
exercise: adaptation, functional movements, why strength training is important 
for *everyone* (men, women, children, old people), the proper technique for 
all the major exercises, back and knee safety, a freakishly effective routine 
for beginners, diet, and a whole lot more. Whether you've never picked up a 
weight in your life or have been lifting for 15 years, I guarantee you will 
learn a lot and that this book will have a significant impact on how you 
train. 

Some of the related resources you may want to look at are 
[startingstrength.com](http://startingstrength.com/) (especially the awesome 
articles in the [resources 
section](http://startingstrength.com/index.php/site/resources)) and the 
[Starting Strength 
Wiki](http://startingstrength.wikia.com/wiki/Starting_Strength_Wiki) 
(especially the [Wit and Wisdom of Mark 
Rippetoe](http://startingstrength.wikia.com/wiki/Wit_and_Wisdom_of_Mark_Rippetoe) 
for some laughs). 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Crossfit 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://www.stemlerfit.com/USERIMAGES/crossfit_logo3.gif" 
/>](http://www.stemlerfit.com/USERIMAGES/crossfit_logo3.gif) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[crossfit.com](http://crossfit.com/) 
 If you really want to understand fitness, Crossfit is your go-to resource. 
Start with [What is 
Fitness?](http://journal.crossfit.com/2002/10/what-is-fitness-by-greg-glassm.tpl), 
the article that'll make you re-think whether triathletes and ultra runners 
are really the "fittest" people on earth. Move onto the 
[Foundations](http://journal.crossfit.com/2002/04/foundations.tpl) article and 
then [Understanding 
Crossfit](http://journal.crossfit.com/2007/04/understanding-crossfit-by-greg.tpl). 
If you still think bicep curls and 30 minutes on the elliptical is the most 
efficient way to reach your goals, then my blog probably isn't for you. 

On the other hand, if you're intrigued, here are some other extremely useful 
resources provided by Crossfit: 
1. [Crossfit Exercises](http://www.crossfit.com/cf-info/excercise.html): 
videos and demos of just about every Crossfit exercise and workout. 

 1. [Crossfit Discussion Board](http://www.board.crossfit.com/): lots of great 
discussions about every topic and tons of helpful people willing to field your 
questions. 

 1. [Crossfit FAQ](http://www.crossfit.com/cf-info/faq.html): essential 
reading if you do Crossfit 

 1. [The Crossfit Journal](http://journal.crossfit.com/): articles discussing 
all things Crossfit, including exercise instruction, routines, equipment, 
nutrition and more. Well worth the $25/year. 

 1. [Crossfit Football](http://www.crossfitfootball.com/): Crossfit site 
tailored for football players, biasing the workouts for strength, power and 
speed. 

 1. [Crossfit Endurance](http://www.crossfitendurance.com/): Crossfit site 
tailored for endurance athletes, biasing the workouts for endurance and 
stamina. 

 1. [SealFit](http://www.sealfit.com/): Crossfit site tailored for military 
(Navy SEAL) athletes, biasing the workouts for being a badass. 


## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Stronglifts 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-wpd1d3cZcdw/Tj0HBNJiWHI/AAAAAAAAJyg/S9bi-DF8S_g/s1600/stronglifts.jpg" 
/>](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-wpd1d3cZcdw/Tj0HBNJiWHI/AAAAAAAAJyg/S9bi-DF8S_g/s1600/stronglifts.jpg) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://stronglifts.com/](http://stronglifts.com/) 
 An awesome free online resource for all things strength. The [5x5 beginner 
routine](http://stronglifts.com/stronglifts-5x5-beginner-strength-training-program/) 
is a good starting point (and very similar to the routine in Starting 
Strength). Follow up with the [lifting 
tutorials](http://stronglifts.com/how-to-squat-with-proper-technique-fix-common-problems/) 
and [diet 
tutorials](http://stronglifts.com/gomad-milk-squats-gallon-gain-weight/). 


<span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">**RossTraining** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" height="80" 
src="http://rosstraining.com/site-img/header.jpg" width="320" 
/>](http://rosstraining.com/site-img/header.jpg) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://rosstraining.com/](http://rosstraining.com/) 
 Awesome site for fighters, general purpose strength &amp; conditioning, and 
DIY/minimalist training. Check out [Burpee 
Conditioning](http://www.bodybuilding.com/fun/rossboxing2.htm), [Strength 
Training for 
Fighters](http://www.rosstraining.com/articles/strengthtraining.html), [The 
Home Gym](http://www.rosstraining.com/articles/thehomegym.html), and [Budget 
Training](http://www.rosstraining.com/articles/budget.html). 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Beast Skills 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://www.beastskills.com/templates/beastskills/images/logo-header.png" 
/>](http://www.beastskills.com/templates/beastskills/images/logo-header.png) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.beastskills.com/](http://www.beastskills.com/) 
 Great tutorials and progressions for all sorts of bodyweight feats, including 
[one arm pull-ups](http://www.beastskills.com/tutorials/tutorials/51), 
[muscle-ups](http://www.beastskills.com/tutorials/tutorials/53), and [the 
human flag](http://www.beastskills.com/tutorials/tutorials/54). 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Olympic 
Weightlifting 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" height="320" 
src="http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/51AhPk0ObxL.jpg" width="247" 
/>](http://ecx.images-amazon.com/images/I/51AhPk0ObxL.jpg) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: center;">[Olympic Weightlifting: a 
Complete Guide for Athletes and 
Coaches](http://www.amazon.com/Olympic-Weightlifting-Complete-Athletes-Coaches/dp/0980011108) 
 Decent guide to the how and why of olympic weightlifting. Very useful if your 
routine includes lots of cleans, jerks and snatches. Even more useful if your 
routine doesn't include them so you know what you're missing. Though not quite 
as comprehensive and generally useful as Starting Strength, it's a useful 
resource. Moreover, Everett's gym, [Catalyst 
Athletics](http://www.cathletics.com/), has a good listing of [daily 
workouts](http://www.cathletics.com/daily/index.php), [exercise 
videos](http://www.cathletics.com/exercises/index.php), and 
[articles](http://www.cathletics.com/articles/index.php). 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Drills and Skills 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://www.drillsandskills.com/images/logo4.jpg" 
/>](http://www.drillsandskills.com/images/logo4.jpg) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.drillsandskills.com/](http://www.drillsandskills.com/) 
 Tutorials for every type of gymnastics movement, including 
[rings](http://www.drillsandskills.com/skills/Rings/), [floor 
skills](http://www.drillsandskills.com/skills/Floor/) and 
[stretching](http://www.drillsandskills.com/stretching). 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">POSE 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" height="33" 
src="http://posetech.com/images/pose-web-title2.gif" width="320" 
/>](http://posetech.com/images/pose-web-title2.gif) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://posetech.com/](http://posetech.com/) 
 If you want to learn to run correctly and especially if you run barefoot or 
in [minimalist 
shoes](http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/07/about-those-shoes.html), you 
should check out the POSE technique of running. The [Crossfit 
Journal](http://journal.crossfit.com/running/) and [Crossfit 
Endurance](http://www.crossfitendurance.com/run/) also have lots of useful 
running tutorials. 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">ExRx 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-OhhfHv0RezA/TkDtE1cLlUI/AAAAAAAAJzE/na01Nm7XeBo/s1600/Picture+50.png" 
/>](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-OhhfHv0RezA/TkDtE1cLlUI/AAAAAAAAJzE/na01Nm7XeBo/s1600/Picture+50.png) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.exrx.net/](http://www.exrx.net/) 
 A good collection of info on exercise, including a thorough [exercise and 
muscle directory](http://www.exrx.net/Lists/Directory.html), [beginners 
guides](http://www.exrx.net/Beginning.html), and 
[FAQ](http://www.exrx.net/Questions.html). 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Stack Exchange 
Fitness and Nutrition 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" height="54" 
src="http://cdn.sstatic.net/fitness/img/logo.png" width="320" 
/>](http://cdn.sstatic.net/fitness/img/logo.png) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://fitness.stackexchange.com/](http://fitness.stackexchange.com/) 
 You're probably more familiar with 
[StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/), but the Stack Exchange sites cover 
a broad range of topics, including a great forum for asking questions about 
fitness and nutrition. 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Dragon Door 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"> 
 <td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" height="77" 
src="http://www.dragondoor.com/cms/images/core/hdr_dragon_door.png" 
width="320" />](http://www.dragondoor.com/cms/images/core/hdr_dragon_door.png) 
 <td class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.dragondoor.com/](http://www.dragondoor.com/) 
 Although the site gets more and more commercialized every day, the [articles 
section](http://www.dragondoor.com/articles/all_articles/) is still useful for 
tutorials on bodyweight and kettlebell training. 

## <span class="Apple-style-span" style="font-size: large;">Resources I 
*don't* recommend 

There are a few resources you'll come across frequently that are best avoided. 
The two most common while searching online are 
[bodybuilding.com](http://www.bodybuilding.com/) and 
[t-nation.com](http://www.t-nation.com/). I find that both of these sites are 
much more concerned with selling stuff than educating people and that the 
quality of the articles is *very* uneven. If you dig, you can uncover some 
gems in both those sites, but they are surrounded by a bunch of marketing 
gimmicks, bro-science, and utter garbage. 

Other disseminators of misinformation include about.com's [exercise 
section](http://exercise.about.com/), [Men's 
Health](http://www.menshealth.com/), and just about every single magazine you 
see at the gym/newstand and every product you see advertised on TV (BowFlex, 
Total Gym, p90x, etc). Again, it's not that these don't occasionally contain 
useful info or effective strategies, it's that you have to pick through so 
much garbage to get there that you're better off avoiding them entirely. 