---
layout: post
title: 5 reasons everyone should watch the Crossfit Games
date: '2011-07-24T02:40:00.000-07:00'
author: Yevgeniy Brikman
tags:
- Crossfit
- Health and Fitness
modified_time: '2011-08-06T14:39:24.135-07:00'
thumbnail: http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-ydwxKvRBnrU/TivboSUe_AI/AAAAAAAAJtI/UzVFdKsACvA/s72-c/open-workouts.png
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5422014336627804072.post-5446078202021224493
blogger_orig_url: http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/07/5-reasons-everyone-should-watch.html
---

The [2011 Crossfit Games](http://games.crossfit.com/) are coming up next 
weekend, July 29 - 30, and as soon as that [live 
stream](http://games.crossfit.com/content/watch-live) is up and running, I'll 
be watching. You should watch too. Why? I'll give you 5 reasons: 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Reason 1: find out what Crossfit is all 
about** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><object 
class="BLOGGER-youtube-video" 
classid="clsid:D27CDB6E-AE6D-11cf-96B8-444553540000" 
codebase="http://download.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=6,0,40,0" 
data-thumbnail-src="http://3.gvt0.com/vi/tzD9BkXGJ1M/0.jpg" height="266" 
width="320"><param name="movie" 
value="http://www.youtube.com/v/tzD9BkXGJ1M&fs=1&source=uds" /><param 
name="bgcolor" value="#FFFFFF" /><embed width="320" height="266"  
src="http://www.youtube.com/v/tzD9BkXGJ1M&fs=1&source=uds" 
type="application/x-shockwave-flash"></embed></object> 
Not all weight lifting is for body building. Not all running is for marathons. 
And not all "gym time" should be spent on jogging, bicep curls and situps. 
Crossfit is about fitness - general, all encompassing, life-long fitness. Take 
some time and learn [why people do 
Crossfit](http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2008/12/tribute-to-crossfit.html), [the 
workouts](http://crossfit.com/), and [the training 
philosophy](http://crossfitgeneration.typepad.com/cfgen/why-crossfit.html). 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Reason 2: the element of surprise** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><object 
class="BLOGGER-youtube-video" 
classid="clsid:D27CDB6E-AE6D-11cf-96B8-444553540000" 
codebase="http://download.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=6,0,40,0" 
data-thumbnail-src="http://0.gvt0.com/vi/fLtTNQtZfDw/0.jpg" height="266" 
width="320"><param name="movie" 
value="http://www.youtube.com/v/fLtTNQtZfDw&fs=1&source=uds" /><param 
name="bgcolor" value="#FFFFFF" /><embed width="320" height="266"  
src="http://www.youtube.com/v/fLtTNQtZfDw&fs=1&source=uds" 
type="application/x-shockwave-flash"></embed></object> 
Crossfit is about training for the unknown: the athletes must develop [all 
aspects of fitness](http://library.crossfit.com/free/pdf/CFJ-trial.pdf) and be 
ready for anything. In fact, the actual workouts in the Crossfit Games are 
kept a complete secret. For example, in 2010, the first few workouts were 
announced only a couple days before the event; the final workouts were only 
announced a few *seconds *before the athletes had to start doing them. All 
sorts of surprises are possible, from workouts with 
[sledgehammers](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VGvpSU18ceg), to handling 
[sandbags and wheelbarrows](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kA1u8ujUh-Q), to 
[burpee wall 
jumps](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zQ_AkdXgVC8&amp;feature=related). 

<span style="font-size: large;">** Reason 3: root for the underdog** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="256" 
src="http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-ydwxKvRBnrU/TivboSUe_AI/AAAAAAAAJtI/UzVFdKsACvA/s320/open-workouts.png" 
width="320" 
/>](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-ydwxKvRBnrU/TivboSUe_AI/AAAAAAAAJtI/UzVFdKsACvA/s1600/open-workouts.png) 
Thousands of athletes from all over the world participated in the [Open 
Competition](http://games.crossfit.com/content/open-summary) to qualify for 
the Games. [Even I tried to qualify back in 
2010](http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2010/03/2010-crossfit-games-northern-california.html). 
It doesn't matter if you work out in a tiny garage gym in the middle of 
nowhere: if you posted a video with a solid time, you could qualify. Crossfit 
is not a sport of millionaire athletes, at least not yet; you have real 
underdogs - people that seem to come out of nowhere - to root for. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Reason 4: community** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="213" 
src="http://games2009.crossfit.com/Games09TommyCongratsMikko.jpg" width="320" 
/>](http://games2009.crossfit.com/Games09TommyCongratsMikko.jpg) 
The Games is one of the rare competitions where competitors will cheer each 
other on. You will not hear trash talk. You will not hear fans booing. The 
athletes are not there for the money. Most of spectators are Crossfitters 
themselves: they know how the competitors train, what they are going through, 
and [why they do 
it](http://games2009.crossfit.com/thegames/a-spectator-explains-why-he-crossfits.html). 
The lack of fierce rivalries and fan bickering is surprisingly refreshing, 
allowing you to cheer for everyone and truly appreciate the incredible feats 
of fitness. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Reason 5: motivation** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><object 
class="BLOGGER-youtube-video" 
classid="clsid:D27CDB6E-AE6D-11cf-96B8-444553540000" 
codebase="http://download.macromedia.com/pub/shockwave/cabs/flash/swflash.cab#version=6,0,40,0" 
data-thumbnail-src="http://0.gvt0.com/vi/xShmoddPPbQ/0.jpg" height="266" 
width="320"><param name="movie" 
value="http://www.youtube.com/v/xShmoddPPbQ&fs=1&source=uds" /><param 
name="bgcolor" value="#FFFFFF" /><embed width="320" height="266"  
src="http://www.youtube.com/v/xShmoddPPbQ&fs=1&source=uds" 
type="application/x-shockwave-flash"></embed></object> 
There is no shortage of inspiring and amazing Crossfit videos: [100lb Kallista 
doing 30 C&amp;J @ 
135lbs](http://media.crossfit.com/cf-video/CrossFitGames08_KallistaCJFinals.mov), 
[Josh Everett does King Kong](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYay78n1dgE), 
[Nicole does 15 bodyweight overhead 
squats](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wjuULPqI-WY), [Turkish Get Up with 
Wife](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uDQUlshxO_8), and more. Watch them. Watch 
the games. Let them inspire you. Who knows, maybe you'll get up off the couch 
and start training. 
<blockquote>*What a disgrace it would be for a man to grow old without ever  
seeing the beauty and strength of which his body is capable.* - 
Socrates</blockquote> 