---
layout: post
title: Apartment hunting tips and tricks
date: '2011-07-25T02:13:00.000-07:00'
author: Yevgeniy Brikman
tags:
- HowTo
- Home
modified_time: '2011-08-06T14:42:22.905-07:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5422014336627804072.post-6659799083659628062
blogger_orig_url: http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/07/apartment-hunting-tips-and-tricks.html
---

My girlfriend and I have been looking for a new apartment for next year, which 
is never an easy process. We don't do this often, so we're learning as we go. 
However, to help other apartment hunters in the future, I thought I'd put 
together a quick blog post that summarizes some of the tools and techniques 
we've been using to make our lives a little easier. If you've got 
suggestions/tips of your own to add, post them in the comments! 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Craigslist** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><table 
align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" class="tr-caption-container" 
style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; text-align: center;"><td 
style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://cdn.moneycrashers.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/craigslist-logo.gif" 
/>](http://cdn.moneycrashers.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/07/craigslist-logo.gif)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.craigslist.org](http://www.craigslist.org/) 
This one should not be a secret to anyone. If you're looking for an apartment, 
house, sublet, condo, roomates, or furniture, 
[craigslist](http://www.craigslist.org/) should be your first step. Nothing 
else quite compares in terms of traffic. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Padmapper** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
height="240" src="http://www.padmapper.com/images/PadLogo.png" width="320" 
/>](http://www.padmapper.com/images/PadLogo.png)<td class="tr-caption" 
style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.padmapper.com/](http://www.padmapper.com/)Craigslist UI 
not quite doing it for you? Me neither. Padmapper overlays craiglist listings 
- as well as a few other apartment sites - on top of a Google Map, so you have 
a nice, visual interface to help you find your next home. There are also some 
nice filters (price, # bedrooms, photos, etc), visual indications of which 
posts you've already clicked on, and even support for email alerts that match 
your selected view &amp; filters. This has been my go-to site for apartment 
hunting. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Hotpads** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
height="84" 
src="http://hotpads.com/images/frontpage/new_logo_2_medsmall110height.png" 
width="320" 
/>](http://hotpads.com/images/frontpage/new_logo_2_medsmall110height.png)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://hotpads.com/](http://hotpads.com/) 
Very similar to padmapper, although the listings seem to come from other 
sites. Key differentiator is the ability to overlay more than just apartments 
on the map, including "heatmaps" for population density and rent ratio as well 
as the locations of schools and public transportation. In my limited 
experience with hotpads, it seems to be used by rental agencies far more than 
private landlords. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**MyApartmentMap** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
height="78" src="http://static.myapartmentmap.com/cache/images/logo.jpg" 
width="320" />](http://static.myapartmentmap.com/cache/images/logo.jpg)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://www.myapartmentmap.com/](http://www.myapartmentmap.com/)Very 
similar to the above two sites, although the map view seems crappier ("you 
have too many properties in view, please zoom in") and occasionally flat out 
broken. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**University postings** 

<table align="center" cellpadding="0" cellspacing="0" 
class="tr-caption-container" style="margin-left: auto; margin-right: auto; 
text-align: center;"><td style="text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
src="http://supost.com/images/site/SUPostLogo.gif?1239766859" 
/>](http://supost.com/images/site/SUPostLogo.gif?1239766859)<td 
class="tr-caption" style="text-align: 
center;">[http://supost.com/](http://supost.com/)If you are near a college 
campus, check with the local housing office to see if there is a bulletin 
board for the university. Stanford, for example, has 
[SUPost](http://supost.com/) which includes a [housing 
section](http://supost.com/search/index/3). 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Email template** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="320" 
src="http://www.handylife.com/images/stories/divers/email.jpg" width="297" 
/>](http://www.handylife.com/images/stories/divers/email.jpg) 
If you use the sites listed above, you'll likely end up sending a lot of 
emails. Here are a few simple pieces of advice to keep things organized: 
1. **Put the posting title into the subject**. For example, if you find an 
apartment on craigslist that has the title "2br/1ba in downtown Palo Alto", 
make that the subject of the email. When a new posting comes up in the future, 
you can just scan the subject lines of your sent mail folder to see if you've 
contacted this place before. 
1. **Include a link to the original posting in the email body**. For example, 
write "I saw your post on craigslist 
(http://sfbay.craiglist.org/foo/bar/12345) and was interested". This way, when 
the owner replies - possibly days later - you'll be able to reference the 
original post to help you remember what apartment you're discussing. 
1. **Keep it short and sweet**. This applies to pretty much all emails. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Checklist** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="248" 
src="http://www.tswdj.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/checklist.jpg" 
width="320" 
/>](http://www.tswdj.com/blog/wp-content/uploads/2011/05/checklist.jpg) 
I'm a bit [obsessed with 
lists](http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2011/07/obsessed-with-lists-how-i-organize-my.html), 
but this one really matters: bring with you a checklist of all the 
features/information you want the apartment to have. If you're seeing multiple 
apartments, or simply forgetful like I am, you are likely to miss some crucial 
piece of data. What's the security deposit? Is there parking? Where do I do 
laundry? Bring a checklist with you and don't leave the place until you have 
everything filled out. There are 
[many](http://www.stanford.edu/dept/rde/chs/campus/info/checklist.html) 
[sample](http://www.bedbathandbeyond.com/btsSurvFirstApartmentDetail.asp?sarticle=LifeFirstApartmentChecklist1&amp;) 
[lists](http://www.orangehousing.com/orange/checklist.htm) online, so do a 
google search and pick the one that best suits your needs. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Bring your camera** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="293" 
src="http://media.the-digital-picture.com/Images/Review/Canon-EOS-5D-Mark-II-Digital-SLR-Camera.jpg" 
width="320" 
/>](http://media.the-digital-picture.com/Images/Review/Canon-EOS-5D-Mark-II-Digital-SLR-Camera.jpg) 
## 
I'm also a bit obsessed with taking [lots of 
pictures](https://picasaweb.google.com/home?showall=true), but bringing your 
camera when seeing apartments is truly worthwhile. After you see 3 or 4 
apartments in a few days, they'll all start to blend together. Having some 
photographic or even video evidence is your best bet for knowing what's what a 
few days later. 

<span style="font-size: large;">**Credit report, application at the ready** 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="320" 
src="http://freecreditreporthelp.net/wp-content/uploads/2009/02/report1.jpg" 
width="311" 
/>](http://freecreditreporthelp.net/wp-content/uploads/2009/02/report1.jpg) 


If you're in a competitive market, every second counts. Many applications 
require you to include a credit report, so having yours printed &amp; ready 
can save you some time. You can get your credit report for free, once per 
year, from 
[https://www.annualcreditreport.com](https://www.annualcreditreport.com/). If 
you really want to move things quickly, you can even fill out a "standard" 
application beforehand and hand it to the owner as soon as you find a place 
you like. The "standard" differs per state, so you'll have to do some 
research. In California, for example, many places use the [California 
Apartment Association Application to 
Rent](http://www.karetakers.com/application2.pdf). Remember, one application 
per tenant. 