---
layout: post
title: 'Sherlock, The Reichenbach Fall: What Really Happened?'
date: '2012-01-30T11:53:00.000-08:00'
author: Yevgeniy Brikman
tags:
- TV and Movies
modified_time: '2012-01-31T22:18:37.009-08:00'
thumbnail: http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-U7B8MS-CoAM/TyjZCSWll4I/AAAAAAAAKW8/QZZly192FhU/s72-c/sherlock-cover.jpg
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-5422014336627804072.post-1865177591065071906
blogger_orig_url: http://brikis98.blogspot.com/2012/01/sherlock-reichenbach-fall-what-really.html
---

The PBS/BBC [Sherlock](http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/masterpiece/sherlock/) series 
is one of the most entertaining shows I've seen in years. It's a modern take 
on Conan Doyle's classic with strong writing, a superb cast, and plenty of 
mystery and deduction. If you're not watching it, you're really missing out. 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><div 
class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
height="179" 
src="http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-U7B8MS-CoAM/TyjZCSWll4I/AAAAAAAAKW8/QZZly192FhU/s320/sherlock-cover.jpg" 
width="320" 
/>](http://1.bp.blogspot.com/-U7B8MS-CoAM/TyjZCSWll4I/AAAAAAAAKW8/QZZly192FhU/s1600/sherlock-cover.jpg) 
<span style="font-size: x-large;">**Spoiler alert!** 

In fact, if you're not watching it, you should probably miss out on this blog 
post too. Seriously, stop reading. 

What follows is an in-depth, full-of-spoilers discussion of what happens in 
the final episode of the show thus far, [The Reichenbach 
Fall](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Reichenbach_Fall). 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**The final question** 

I'm sure you know exactly what I'm going to discuss: how did Sherlock fake his 
own death? 

Using my amateur deductive reasoning and a healthy amount of rewind &amp; 
pause, I have a pretty good guess at what happened. Let me walk you through 
the reasoning. 

To start with, let's state the *very *obvious: either the body that fell off 
the roof was (a) Sherlock, or (b) it wasn't. I think we can fairly confidently 
eliminate option (b). 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**An impostor?** 

Could Sherlock have thrown Moriarty's body or the test dummy from earlier in 
the episode in his place? Not likely. 

First, there was no way Sherlock could have bent over, hauled up a body or a 
dummy, brought it to the edge, and shoved it over, all without Watson 
noticing. There were some quick cuts and edits during the scenen, but we have 
no reason to believe that Watson looked away from Sherlock at any point during 
their conversation. 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="174" 
src="http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-ZL_fWn11KiQ/TyjZCxtD34I/AAAAAAAAKXE/KUJUQ80MVnU/s320/sherlock-roof.jpg" 
width="320" 
/>](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-ZL_fWn11KiQ/TyjZCxtD34I/AAAAAAAAKXE/KUJUQ80MVnU/s1600/sherlock-roof.jpg) 
Other practicalities make this even more difficult: Moriarty was dressed 
noticeably differently than Sherlock (different coat, white shirt instead of 
dark, a tie instead of a scarf) and had shorter hair; *seconds* before 
Sherlock jumps, he looks back and Moriarty's body is lying there, *still *in 
the original outfit; the scene where Sherlock jumps is shot from behind and 
it's clear no one is just shoving a body/dummy off the roof. 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><div 
class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
height="158" 
src="http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-vhg25ilkfUM/TyjYbnTSyYI/AAAAAAAAKWk/tcm6ZhnEGmQ/s320/sherlock-fall.jpg" 
width="320" 
/>](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-vhg25ilkfUM/TyjYbnTSyYI/AAAAAAAAKWk/tcm6ZhnEGmQ/s1600/sherlock-fall.jpg)<div 
class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"> 
Finally, the biggest evidence of all: the body falling through the air is 
clearly flailing its arms and legs. Neither a dummy nor a dead body would fall 
like that. 

## Verdict: it must have been Sherlock himself who jumped off the building. 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**How did he survive?** 

One key piece of evidence is that Sherlock is extremely specific in where he 
wants Watson to stand during their conversation. Here is the layout of the 
scene: 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="240" 
src="http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-upeln_f4074/TyZMv1_5WsI/AAAAAAAAKWc/tOiNCyCw7EU/s320/Sherlock.png" 
width="320" 
/>](http://4.bp.blogspot.com/-upeln_f4074/TyZMv1_5WsI/AAAAAAAAKWc/tOiNCyCw7EU/s1600/Sherlock.png) 

When Watson arrives, Sherlock is on the hospital roof, some 6-8 stories up, 
with a shorter, 2-3 story brick building between him and Watson. Watson tries 
to run around to the side of the brick building, but Sherlock yells at him to 
return to his previous spot. Sherlock is *very *vehement about this. 

It's likely that Watson would be able to see Sherlock from either vantage 
point, which leaves only one other possibility for why Sherlock would care 
about where Watson stands: 
<blockquote class="tr_bq">(1) There was *something* between the brick building 
and the hospital that Sherlock didn't want Watson to see.</blockquote>After 
Sherlock jumps, Watson again tries to run around the brick building and this 
time, is knocked down by someone on a bike. This is unlikely to be an accident 
and gives us our second hint: 
<blockquote class="tr_bq">(2) Sherlock needed to delay Watson until the 
*something* was no longer visible.</blockquote>If you watch the scene closely, 
there is one item that fits both of these criteria: a truck filled with bags 
(garbage? recycling? laundry?) parked right next to the spot where Sherlock's 
body ends up. You get your first glimpse of this truck just as Watson is 
coming around the corner, just before he is knocked down: 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img 
border="0" height="180" 
src="http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-c34aJT8TpnI/TyjYt-xqjpI/AAAAAAAAKW0/XctaBd3g-iw/s320/sherlock-truck-1.gif" 
width="320" 
/>](http://2.bp.blogspot.com/-c34aJT8TpnI/TyjYt-xqjpI/AAAAAAAAKW0/XctaBd3g-iw/s1600/sherlock-truck-1.gif) 
<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"> 
You see the same truck *drive away, *out of the scene, a few seconds later as 
Watson finally gets to Holmes' body: 

<div class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;"><div 
class="separator" style="clear: both; text-align: center;">[<img border="0" 
height="180" 
src="http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-lu00tOSyuEU/TyjYtIbla_I/AAAAAAAAKWs/9DhCC0lbzfI/s320/sherlock-truck-2.gif" 
width="320" 
/>](http://3.bp.blogspot.com/-lu00tOSyuEU/TyjYtIbla_I/AAAAAAAAKWs/9DhCC0lbzfI/s1600/sherlock-truck-2.gif) 
Think on that for a second: if a body comes crashing down a few feet from your 
truck, do you just casually drive away or jump out and see what the hell just 
happened? The fact that the truck drove away increases our confidence that it 
was part of the plot. 

## Verdict: the bags in the back of the truck served as padding to break 
Sherlocks' fall. 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**How did it go down?** 

Before meeting with Moriarty, Holmes seeks out Molly and tells her that he 
thinks he will die and that he needs her help. Holmes must've already realized 
that Moriarty's goal was to get him to commit suicide, so he enlisted Molly - 
who works at a morgue and could certainly fake autopsy reports and death 
certificates - to help him fake it. It's also worth remembering that it was 
Sherlock, not Moriarty, who arranged the meeting on, of all places, the 
rooftop of a hospital. 

When Moriarty blew his brains out, Sherlock had no choice, and jumped. He 
landed in the truck, covered himself with some sort of blood (possibly 
provided by Molly), and dropped down onto the pavement to play dead. In fact, 
he did better than that. We saw Holmes with a bouncy ball much of the episode; 
it turns out there is a classic [magic 
trick](http://www.freemagictricks4u.com/heart-stop.html) that involves 
squeezing a ball under your armpit to cut off circulation to your arm and make 
it seem like you have no heartbeat. 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**What about the bystanders?** 

Since all the bystanders could see the truck and Holmes fall into it, they 
must have been in on it. The crowd that gathers around Holmes' body and the 
biker that knocks over Watson were either part of Holmes' homeless network or 
government folks brought in by Mycroft. 

Mycroft is an interesting possibility because his reaction to reading about 
Holmes' death is ambiguous: was he sad or relieved? Even more telling is the 
fact that Mycroft isn't with Watson and Mrs. Hudson at the cemetery to pay his 
respects to Holmes. My guess is that Mycroft knows Sherlock is alive, though 
it's possible that he merely deduced it after the fact. 

<span style="font-size: x-large;">**No matter how improbable..** 

It'll be some time before the third season comes out and reveals the truth. In 
the meantime, feel free to join me in speculating by leaving your best theory 
in the comments. 